Morning.
Good morning, Gerard.
Morning, Penny.
Morning.
Very good. You both here, thank you for taking the time to join us at
Parliament this morning.
We'll have you in here for
15 minutes. 10 minutes? 10 minute.
And, yeah, just like to welcome you on behalf of the committee.
I know you've both got personal lived experience through this and
have put together a very helpful pack
for us to consider. So, I'll hand that time over to you now.
If you want to leave us any for questions, you may, but that's up to you.
Yep.
Thank you.
Mōrena, everyone, and thank you for the opportunity to present
today. My name is Gerard Rushton, and
I'm chairman of the Meningitis Foundation of Aotearoa, New Zealand.
I have with me today Penny Taylor,
a meningitis survivor.
We presented to this committee in 2022, at which time we had support from
all parties across Parliament. We also had support from Te Whatu
Ora, Pharmac, and the Health Select Committee.
There has been some progress since then, but our adolescents are still
at risk.
So why does meningitis-- I'll just ask for the next slide, please.
What does meningitis prevention and awareness
matter?
The mortality and morbidity rate of meningitis makes it one of the most feared
diseases. It can take a life in a matter of
hours,
hence the need to protect people with vaccinations, because
often treatment comes too late.
The current criteria for adolescence vaccinations means
the majority of our at-risk adolescents are simply not
protected.
Recent cases in Dunedin and the UK are a stark reminder
that without a full and equitable vaccination program, how
quickly an outbreak can grow.
And we believe New Zealand is grossly unprepared to deal with such an
outbreak.
Next slide, please.
I'd like now to introduce Penny Taylor.
Penny is one of our VIPs, a very impacted person.
So thank you, Penny. I'd just like to hear your story now.
Sorry, I have a few notes because my brain does
move around a little bit. So
15 years ago, I contracted meningococcal,
and
it was a normal, typical day. I was a mum of
a three and a seven-year-old.
And the only symptom I had was vomiting, out
of all of the symptoms that there are.
I naturally thought it was
a bug from my daughter's daycare center.
Within hours, my mum came past my house and found me
unconscious.
I was taken to Palmerston North Hospital, and
at that point, I was given 30 minutes to live and a 2% survival
chance.
So I spent one month in a coma. I blew up
twice the size of myself,
and all my organs had failed, and I had a
42-degree temperature, which I was
essentially frying from the inside.
As a result, with my organs failing, I then
had septicaemia come in,
and as you can see by my pictures, it took hold, and
I looked like a very severe case of frostbite
over my legs and fingers.
After a month, they woke me up, and so
Palmerston North Hospital knew that I would need
debriding and skin grafting, amputations,
dialysis, a severe range of internal
treatment. They were trying to get me into Waikato Hospital because the
burns and the
dialysis is all in the one hospital.
They wouldn't accept me because I was out of the region.
So I was helicoptered to
Hutt Hospital for the plastics,
and was in their high dependency ward.
At that point, I had my amputation, so I still was at
very high risk that I wasn't going to make the surgery.
So after 12 hours, they amputated my legs, they
amputated my fingers and my hand, and did all my
skin grafting all over my body.
The next month was probably the most torturous part of the whole journey
that didn't really need to happen had I gone to
Waikato.
Morning and night, I was having surgeries, and in between, they were
transporting me to Wellington Hospital for dialysis.
So every single bump, touch, I would feel.
The dialysis, although it was working for my kidneys,
it would dialyze all the medication, so left me with nothing to
come back on. And so I was playing catch up every single day with pain
meds.
That was excruciating.
After that, I was transferred back to Palmerston North Hospital for
rehabilitation.
The hand therapist was on holiday, and they had no one else, and as a
result, my hand is frozen,
and I have limited function in it.And that is
not from the disease, that is from lack of
physiotherapy.
As soon as I was out of hospital, everything stopped.
I had no aftercare. I had no
physiotherapy. I was there to fight for myself.
I had two small children.
So I was in a wheelchair.
Largely, my mum and dad were there to help support me.
But it took me-- I had to make a decision to financially, I needed to
go back to work because I couldn't survive.
So the only way I could go back part-- was to go back part-time,
because physically, I was exhausted.
I was still trying to recover from this disease,
run a family,
and try and have an income.
So it was pretty tough going.
Then came the days of prosthetics.
As you can imagine, my skins were very, very delicate and scarred.
So when I went to the Limb Centre in Wellington,
they literally looked at me and didn't think they could help.
So, but the five years of working
part-time and a five-year battle of prosthetics
resulted basically me in a wheelchair.
So completely frustrated by that entire system,
that prosthetics was my only option, the traditional sockets.
I went searching for something else,
which I found a surgeon in Australia who does
osteo integration surgery,
and that is an implant that directly goes into your
skeleton.
No socket, my skin would be okay.
I qualified for that surgery,
with my bone density and my internal organs
being reasonably healthy.
Once I had that surgery, I had that surgery 10 years ago,
I then went right back to square one to a wheelchair again, and I had a two-year
rehabilitation
program run through the Australian team.
What that surgery has given me back--
Sorry, on that surgery, that was completely unsupported by New Zealand.
They thought I was putting myself at risk, and they did not
support my decision to have that surgery.
So 10 years of that surgery, I have battled
on my own and self-advocated for myself.
But what that surgery has given me, I had to fundraise for the surgery
and pay for it myself.
What it has given me, it's enabled me to go back to work
full-time. I am a gym
goer. I walk over 10,000 steps a day.
I do what everyone else does,
and so that was worth it for me. I
actually got my life back by choosing to fund this
myself
and make that decision.
I have since worked with the Limb Center and with
the 10 years of history that I have,
to present that this could be an option for people.
So
this, I guess for me, I have the drive and the
motivation to self-advocate and fight through.
I had my two children to live for, and that was my driving
force. However, not everyone has that, and they don't
have a voice,
which is a real kicker for me.
The last 15 years has been a complete roller coaster,
and I have literally done it on my own.
A vaccine could have saved all of that for
me. I was 36 years of age, so I was
outside of the normal age bracket.
The mental and the physical and the financial impact that it has had on me in the
last 15 years is significant.
I am evidence of what it does do,
and
the varying conditions that people are left with if they do survive.
Sure do.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Well, thank you, Penny. If we could just change the slide. Thank you.
Yeah, thank you, Penny. Very brave of you to come here today and share your story.
It's traumatic. And I guess, I could leave my
presentation there because that's justification on
its own for what we're talking about.
And clearly from
Penny's presentation, the New Zealand health system is
failing us with limited vaccine access, a lack of support
for survivors. We have no fence at the top of the cliff, and we have no
ambulance at the bottom either.
Sure do.
Since the implementation of the infant vaccination
program in 2023, the vaccination rates in our
infants have raised,
and the number of cases of
infant meningitis have
noticeably reduced. So the
vaccine actually works.
We're concerned the adolescent criteria is far too narrow.
It's confusing.
We question the rationale around it.
Why is it right that someone that can afford to go to boarding school or be
in the halls of residence should qualify for a free vaccination as
against anyone else who's an adolescent in our country?
Our Māori and Pasifika population are five times more likely to
contract meningitis, yet most of them do not
qualify for a free vaccination. Why?
Meningitis vaccination vaccines applications are
penalized in the Pharmac process
because simply the more people that require a vaccine-Um,
weights against the inclusion of that vaccine onto the
schedule because of the cost of implementation.
If New Zealanders want it, we should give it to them.
These inequalities result in deaths and
disabilities which are preventable.
Just change the slide. Thank you. The awareness or lack of it.
In 2023, the Health Select Committee report recommended an awareness
campaign. This hasn't happened.
During the period uh, in the absence of a national campaign
from Te Whatu Ora, the foundation has led a nationwide, um,
awareness campaigns. It has produced and distributed 12,500
coloring-in books, which are in your handout.
It has developed a multilingual, um,
symptoms QR codes so that people can download the symptoms and have it on their
phone all the time.
Um,
and that improves access to key health information for them.
We've distributed 8,500 pens and thousands of information brochures
throughout New Zealand universities. Just to change the slide. Thank you.
The Meningitis Foundation has also engaged with universities across the
country via social media. We've been present at
O-Weeks and wellness events at most universities through New
Zealand and have had, have engaged with thousands of, of
students during that process. GSK has driven a
television advertising program, which has raised awareness.
The inconsistent messaging from, uh, medical, uh,
professionals, as evidenced in the feedback from parents of
students and those that provide, um, student
accommodation, uh, which are in, in your handout, show that
there's a complete still a, a, a lack of awareness around
meningitis vaccination and the need for it.
The underlying theme of all meningitis cases is simply a lack of awareness.
Te Whatu Ora are, are absent in all of the above.
Next slide, please.
Just to be mindful, we're a few minutes-
Yep
... over time.
So our ask is that we need a, a bipartisan support for a fully, uh, funded
vaccination program. At minimum, eligibility
for the vaccination program should be expanded to
include all those who are community
services cardholders.
Uh, we're asking for better aftercare for survivors,
and refer to the research document in our handout from Wellington
University on that. We'd also like, um, improved monitoring and
faster notification of cases, so.
We'd welcome any-- Thank you for your time and welcome any questions.
Thank you. Thank you, Gerard. Um, we won't have time for questions,
unfortunately, but I don't necessarily know that we need them.
It's some, um, horrific story, Penny
and, uh, Gerard, I know from talking with previously what this has
done to
your family. Um-
Oh, Mr. Chair-
Asha
... with, um, with your permission, could I be permitted just one very
qui-quick question to clarify-
Yes, you may
... clarify that point two of your, your ask there.
Um, which-- what age will the community service cardholders
be in that, in that proposal?
Uh, our adolescents.
Okay. Understood.
That's, that's the second highest at-risk group.
I see. So ideally, you want all adolescents and, at a minimum, community service
cardholders.
Uh, the best time to, to implement a vaccination program is, is a
school-based program when, when they're, um, actually-- They need to be
protected before they go out into the community.
Mm-hmm.
So yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you.
And we thank you for your time. I mean, you people have the chance to, to make a
difference, to save lives, to save disabilities, so
we're asking you to take that opportunity.
Thank you very much for coming to Wellington today and presenting to us.
It was a really impactful presentation from you both.
Thank you.
Thanks.